blog post on OAuth an OIDC (#107)
biscuit-auth/website: content/blog/oauth-oidc.md

+++
title = "OAuth 2.0, OIDC and Biscuit"
description = "How Biscuit can fit in existing systems"
date = 2023-06-17T00:09:00+02:00
draft = false
template = "blog/page.html"

[taxonomies]
authors = ["geal"]

[extra]
lead = "How OAuth 2.0 and OIDC work, and how to integrate Biscuit with them"
+++

##OAuth 2

> [OAuth 2.0](https://oauth.net/2/) is a serie of specifications describing authorization and delegation flows between services. It looks at service access through a list of roles:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[OAuth 2.0](https://oauth.net/2/) is a series of specifications describing authorization and delegation flows between services. It looks at service access through a list of roles:
```

* *resource owner*: an agent that can give access to a resource. That can be a human, but also a service
* *resource server*: service holding the resources (data, specific actions to launch, etc), requiring authorization from the resource owner to give access to a client
* *client*: an application that accesses the resources on the resource server, on behalf on the resource owner. It could be anything, anywhere, like a mobile client in your phone that accesses data when you want to consult it, or a remote service that will periodically access your data to back it up
* *authorization server*: a service that issues access tokens used by the client to tell the resource server that they represent the resource owner
* *access token*: this can be anything, like a random string, or a cryptographic token like Biscuit, as long as the resource server can use it to recognize a specific resource owner

> Depending on the system, some of those roles can be mixed: the resource server could also be the authorization server if they are in the same monomithic service, and the resource server and client could be the same web application.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Depending on the system, some of those roles can be mixed: the resource server could also be the authorization server if they are in the same monolithic service, and the resource server and client could be the same web application.
```

Based on those roles, OAuth 2.0 defines a list of authorization flows, and they all follow a general pattern:
* the resource owner wants the client to access their resources
* the client contacts the authorization server to start the flow

> * the authorization server requests that the resource owner explicitely accepts it, generally by redirecting the resource owner to a page on the autorization server, eventually requiring username, password, etc

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* the authorization server requests that the resource owner explicitly accepts it, generally by redirecting the resource owner to a page on the autorization server, eventually requiring username, password, etc
```

eventually as in finally? Or potentially/optionally?

Author: As in optionally. Some don't even verify that the token works

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* the authorization server requests that the resource owner explicitely accepts it, generally by redirecting the resource owner to a page on the autorization server, optionally requiring username, password, etc
```

Ok then, eventually means finally, not _éventuellement_.

* the authorization server delivers an access token to the client

> * the client uses the access token to request the resource server

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* the client uses the access token to issue a request to the resource server
```

> The different authorization flows target different use cases, like mobile applications, single page web applications, smart TVs...

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The different authorization flows target different use cases, like mobile applications, single page web applications, smart TVs…
```

* the user connects to B and C using service A, so B and C recieved access token for the user's ressources on A
* now, the malicious admin of service C wants to access service B. They start the OAuth authoization to service B, but at the point where they are redirected to A, and must return the new access token, they instead provide the token they already have for the user
* B checks that the token is valid, and lets them in

<details>
For people who like to understand a bit more, this is one of the reasons the OAuth implicit flow is deprecated, that scenario wouldn't work under the authorization code flow
</details>
This is the fundamental misunderstanding here: a well behaving OAuth client will keep the access token safe, because it needs it to access resources. But there is no guarantee that it was delivered specifically for this client, nor that the user actually gave consent during this process. A misbehaving application could just use it as an authentication proof anywhere else. And we're not even getting into the issue of applications using your Github or Twitter accounts supposedly only for authentication, but requiring write access to everything.

> That is why the OIDC protocol was designed: providing a safer delegate authentication mechanism. Essentially, when a service requests that a user authenticates with an OIDC service, it will perform an OAuth authorization flow where the response contains an ID token. The ID token is a [JSON Web Token](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7519), which contains [a specific set of claims](https://openid.net/specs/openid-connect-core-1_0.html#IDToken) used to identify the user. Some of those claims are required and carry the security of the system, like `aud` indicating for which serice this token was created, `auth_time` for the exact time when the authentication was performed, or the `nonce` claim containing a value provided in the authentication request (if it's not the same as what was requested, the token is considered invalid).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
That is why the OIDC protocol was designed: providing a safer delegate authentication mechanism. Essentially, when a service requests that a user authenticates with an OIDC service, it will perform an OAuth authorization flow where the response contains an ID token. The ID token is a [JSON Web Token](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7519), which contains [a specific set of claims](https://openid.net/specs/openid-connect-core-1_0.html#IDToken) used to identify the user. Some of those claims are required and carry the security of the system, like `aud` indicating for which service this token was created, `auth_time` for the exact time when the authentication was performed, or the `nonce` claim containing a value provided in the authentication request (if it's not the same as what was requested, the token is considered invalid).
```

Reviewer: What does "carry the security" mean here?

The application can even request more information in the ID token, like the user's email address or profile picture, if supported by the authentication server.

## Using OAuth with OIDC

Now a picture is forming of what happens in this process:
* service A is an OIDC server
* service B is an OAuth resource server and authorization server, and uses OIDC for authentication
* the user wants to connect their client to to B
* the client starts the OAuth authorization flow to B's authorization server
* the authorization server starts the authentication process with A
* the user authenticates to A (login, password, 2FA, etc)
* A returns an ID token to the authorization server
* the authorization server verifies the token, checks that they are the intended audience, and matches the subject identifier to the user they have in their database
* the authorization server delivers an access token for B to the client
* the client accesses resources on B

> Now we ay be tempted to used to ID token directly as access token in B. But that would be making the same mistake as before: the ID token's intended audience is B, and that tells nothing about the relatin between the client and B.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now we may be tempted to use the ID token directly as an access token in B. But that would be making the same mistake as before: the ID token's intended audience is B, and that tells nothing about the relation between the client and B.
```

## Refresh tokens

> In general, the OAuth authorization server delivers both an access token and a refresh token to the client. WHat's the difference?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In general, the OAuth authorization server delivers both an access token and a refresh token to the client. What's the difference?
```
